Update faq.md Add Missing Data FAQ (#15)
MIxS-MInAS/MIxS-MInAS.github.io: docs/documentation/user-documentation/faq.md

_There is no specific taxonomy terms for positive and negative controls_

## How do I fill in negative controls?

_TODO_

## How to fill in missing data

> Follow the [INSDC Missing Value Reporting](https://www.insdc.org/technical-specifications/missing-value-reporting/) specifications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the [INSDC Missing Value Reporting](https://www.insdc.org/technical-specifications/missing-value-reporting/) specifications.

```

- Missing data is (meta)data that **can not** be reported. This can be due to various constraints, such as:
  - the data is truly missing, meaning it is not known and can not be known;
  - it can not be shared for privacy reasons;
  - it can not be shared due to data agreement restrictions;
  - it is not applicable to that particular field (e.g. it is a negative control and the field does not apply)

> - Missing data should only be reported for **mandatory** fields, not for **recommended** or **optional** fields. For the latter two, simply leave the field blank if the (meta)data are missing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - it is not applicable to that particular field (e.g. it is a negative control and the field does not apply)
- Missing data should only be reported for **mandatory** fields, not for **recommended** or **optional** fields. For the latter two, simply leave the field blank if the (meta)data are missing.

Each of these cases have specific ways of encoding 'missingness' as per the INSDC guidelines. 

```

> - Missing data should only be reported for **mandatory** fields, not for **recommended** or **optional** fields. For the latter two, simply leave the field blank if the (meta)data are missing.

Reviewer: I think the mandatory fields sentence should go at the beginning of this section in a preamble paragraph and say more along the lines of:

Fields in MIxS that are mandatory always require _something_ filled into the given metadata entry. If you do not have this information, you must encode this using the specific 'missing information' categories as below.

While optional fields in MIxS can be left blank, if you have a specific reason the information will never be able to be reported (see examples below), then it is good to use these missing data categories there also.

- There are three levels at which you can report missing data, with an increasing amount of specificity for each: _**top level**_, _**lower level**_, and _**reporting level**_. Be as specific/granular as possible when reporting missing values. The _top level_ indicates that the data are missing, while the _lower-_ and _reporting_ levels give a reason (from the [controlled vocabulary](https://www.insdc.org/technical-specifications/missing-value-reporting/)) why the data are missing.
- Always report the _top level_ (i.e. "not applicable" or "missing") even when reporting at the more granular levels, in which case separate the _top level_ and _lower/reporting level_ terms with ": ".
- If using terms from the most granular level (_reporting level_), then exclude the _lower level_ term, as each _reporting level_ term is a "child" of the _lower level_, which can then be inferred based on the [table](https://www.insdc.org/technical-specifications/missing-value-reporting/).

> ### Examples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Examples

```

_There is no specific taxonomy terms for positive and negative controls_

## How do I fill in negative controls?

_TODO_

## How to fill in missing data
Fields in MIxS that are mandatory always require something filled into the given metadata entry. 
If you do not have this information, you must encode this using the specific 'missing information' categories as below.

While optional fields in MIxS can be left blank, if you have a specific reason the information will never be able to be reported (see examples below), then it is good to use these missing data categories there also.

Use missing value terms from the [INSDC Missing Value Reporting](https://www.insdc.org/technical-specifications/missing-value-reporting/) specifications.
More details and examples follow below.

- Missing data is (meta)data that **can not** be reported. This can be due to various constraints, such as:
  - the data is truly missing, meaning it is not known and can not be known;
  - it can not be shared for privacy reasons;
  - it can not be shared due to data agreement restrictions;
  - it is not applicable to that particular field (e.g. it is a negative control and the field does not apply)

> - Missing data should only be reported for **mandatory** fields, not for **recommended** or **optional** fields. For the latter two, simply leave the field blank if the (meta)data are missing.

Author: ```suggestion
```

- Always report the _top level_ (i.e. "not applicable" or "missing") even when reporting at the more granular levels, in which case separate the _top level_ and _lower/reporting level_ terms with ": ".
- If using terms from the most granular level (_reporting level_), then exclude the _lower level_ term, as each _reporting level_ term is a "child" of the _lower level_, which can then be inferred based on the [table](https://www.insdc.org/technical-specifications/missing-value-reporting/).

Note that the way that you can use the missing data categories in a particular metadata entry will depend on the implementer of the MIxS-MInAS standard.
For example, in some implementations, numeric-only metadata terms may not allow non-number characters and thus will fail validation when giving e.g. `not applicable: control sample` category.
In these cases, refer to the documentation of the place you are submitting your metadata to. 

### Examples

- Information is missing for unknown reasons:
    - `missing`

> - missing: not collected

Author: ```suggestion
- Information is missing because it was not collected during a historical sampling event, or the collection records burnt down:
    - `missing: not collected`
```

_There is no specific taxonomy terms for positive and negative controls_

## How do I fill in negative controls?

_TODO_

## How to fill in missing data
Fields in MIxS that are mandatory always require something filled into the given metadata entry. 
If you do not have this information, you must encode this using the specific 'missing information' categories as below.

> While optional fields in MIxS can be left blank, if you have a specific reason the information will never be able to be reported (see examples below), then it is good to use these missing data categories there also.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While optional fields in MIxS can be left blank, if you have a specific reason the information will never be able to be reported (see examples below), then it is also good to use these missing data categories there.
```

Use missing value terms from the [INSDC Missing Value Reporting](https://www.insdc.org/technical-specifications/missing-value-reporting/) specifications.
More details and examples follow below.

- Missing data is (meta)data that **can not** be reported. This can be due to various constraints, such as:
  - the data is truly missing, meaning it is not known and can not be known;
  - it can not be shared for privacy reasons;
  - it can not be shared due to data agreement restrictions;
  - it is not applicable to that particular field (e.g. it is a negative control and the field does not apply)

Each of these cases have specific ways of encoding 'missingness' as per the INSDC guidelines. 

- There are three levels at which you can report missing data, with an increasing amount of specificity for each:

- _**top level**_ 
- _**lower level**_

> - _**reporting level**_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- top level 
- lower level
- reporting level
```

> Be as specific/granular as possible when reporting missing values. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Be as specific/granular as possible when reporting missing values, i.e., try and specify to the reporting level as far as possible. 
```

> The _top level_ indicates that the data are missing, while the _lower-_ and _reporting_ levels give a reason (from the [controlled vocabulary](https://www.insdc.org/technical-specifications/missing-value-reporting/)) why the data are missing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The _top level_ only indicates that the data are missing. The _lower-_ and _reporting_ levels then additional provide a reason for the missingness (from the [controlled vocabulary](https://www.insdc.org/technical-specifications/missing-value-reporting/)).
```

- Always report the _top level_ (i.e. "not applicable" or "missing") even when reporting at the more granular levels, in which case separate the _top level_ and _lower/reporting level_ terms with ": ".

> - If using terms from the most granular level (_reporting level_), then exclude the _lower level_ term, as each _reporting level_ term is a "child" of the _lower level_, which can then be inferred based on the [table](https://www.insdc.org/technical-specifications/missing-value-reporting/).

Author: I agree with you, but in the INSDC [guidance](https://www.insdc.org/technical-specifications/missing-value-reporting/) the explanation and examples imply to me that this is how it should be reported (`missing: endangered species`). 

Also, this is how it has now been implemented in MIxS, and with a missing values enum. See: https://github.com/GenomicsStandardsConsortium/mixs/pull/955 and https://genomicsstandardsconsortium.github.io/mixs/InsdcMissingValueEnum/.

So leaving it as-is for now. 
If we want to change this, we should log an issue with MIxS and ask for the enum to be updated with all valid combinations of `top level: lower level, reporting level`.

Note that the way that you can use the missing data categories in a particular metadata entry will depend on the implementer of the MIxS-MInAS standard.
For example, in some implementations, numeric-only metadata terms may not allow non-number characters and thus will fail validation when giving e.g. `not applicable: control sample` category.
In these cases, refer to the documentation of the place you are submitting your metadata to. 

> ### Examples

Reviewer: [![praise](https://img.shields.io/badge/praise-28A745)](https://pullpo.io/cc?l=praise) 
These are great examples :)

These specifications can be summarised as follows (examples are given below):

- Missing data is (meta)data that **can not** be reported. This can be due to various constraints, such as:
  - the data is truly missing, meaning it is not known and can not be known;
  - it can not be shared for privacy reasons;
  - it can not be shared due to data agreement restrictions;
  - it is not applicable to that particular field (e.g. it is a negative control and the field does not apply)

Each of these cases have specific ways of encoding 'missingness' as per the INSDC guidelines. 

There are three levels at which you can report missing data, with an increasing amount of specificity for each:

- top level 
- lower level
- reporting level

Be as specific/granular as possible when reporting missing values, i.e., try and specify to the reporting level as far as possible. 
The _top level_ only indicates that the data are missing. The _lower-_ and _reporting_ levels then additional provide a reason for the missingness (from the [controlled vocabulary](https://www.insdc.org/technical-specifications/missing-value-reporting/)).
Some additional recommendations:

> - Always report the _top level_ (i.e. "not applicable" or "missing") even when reporting at the more granular levels, in which case separate the _top level_ and _lower/reporting level_ terms with ": ".

Author: ```suggestion
- Always report the _top level_ (i.e. "not applicable" or "missing") 
- When reporting at the more granular levels, always use "missing: " as the _top level_ and then report the _lower/reporting level_ term, so for example: "missing: third party data".
- See the [MIxS controlled vocabulary for missing data](https://genomicsstandardsconsortium.github.io/mixs/InsdcMissingValueEnum/) for more examples and permissible values.

```

- If using terms from the most granular level (_reporting level_), then exclude the _lower level_ term, as each _reporting level_ term is a "child" of the _lower level_, which can then be inferred based on the [table](https://www.insdc.org/technical-specifications/missing-value-reporting/).

Note that the way that you can use the missing data categories in a particular metadata entry will depend on the implementer of the MIxS-MInAS standard.

> For example, in some implementations, numeric-only metadata terms may not allow non-number characters and thus will fail validation when giving e.g. `not applicable: control sample` category.

Author: ```suggestion
For example, in some implementations, numeric-only metadata terms may not allow non-number characters and thus will fail validation when giving e.g. `missing: control sample` category.
```

Author: When reporting at the `reporting level`, one uses `missing: ` to precede the reporting level, regardless of whether it is actually `not applicable`. 
This is according to the INSDC and the MIxS missing values [enum](https://genomicsstandardsconsortium.github.io/mixs/InsdcMissingValueEnum/).

_There is no specific taxonomy terms for positive and negative controls_

## How do I fill in negative controls?

_TODO_

## How to fill in missing data

> 

Author: ```suggestion
- Missing data is (meta)data that **can not** be reported. This can be due to various constraints, such as:  
  - the data is truly missing, meaning it is not known and can not be known;
  - it can not be shared for privacy reasons;
  - it can not be shared due to data agreement restrictions;
  - it is not applicable to that particular field (e.g. it is a negative control and the field does not apply)
```

_There is no specific taxonomy terms for positive and negative controls_

## How do I fill in negative controls?

_TODO_

## How to fill in missing data

- Missing data is (meta)data that **can not** be reported. This can be due to various constraints, such as:  
  - the data is truly missing, meaning it is not known and can not be known;
  - it can not be shared for privacy reasons;
  - it can not be shared due to data agreement restrictions;
  - it is not applicable to that particular field (e.g. it is a negative control and the field does not apply)

Fields in MIxS that are mandatory (or 'required') always require something filled into the given metadata entry. 
If you do not have this information, you must encode this using the specific 'missing information' categories as below.

While optional fields in MIxS can be left blank, if you have a specific reason the information will never be able to be reported (see examples below), then it is also good to use these missing data categories there.

> The way for encoding missing value terms in MIxS is derived from the [INSDC Missing Value Reporting](https://www.insdc.org/technical-specifications/missing-value-reporting/) specifications.

Author: ```suggestion
The way for encoding missing value terms in MIxS is derived from the [INSDC Missing Value Reporting](https://www.insdc.org/technical-specifications/missing-value-reporting/) specifications.
The list of allowed missing values terms for MIxS can be found [here](https://genomicsstandardsconsortium.github.io/mixs/InsdcMissingValueEnum/).
```

  - the data is truly missing, meaning it is not known and can not be known;
  - it can not be shared for privacy reasons;
  - it can not be shared due to data agreement restrictions;
  - it is not applicable to that particular field (e.g. it is a negative control and the field does not apply)

Fields in MIxS that are mandatory (or 'required') always require something filled into the given metadata entry. 
If you do not have this information, you must encode this using the specific 'missing information' categories as below.

While optional fields in MIxS can be left blank, if you have a specific reason the information will never be able to be reported (see examples below), then it is also good to use these missing data categories there.

The way for encoding missing value terms in MIxS is derived from the [INSDC Missing Value Reporting](https://www.insdc.org/technical-specifications/missing-value-reporting/) specifications.
The list of allowed missing values terms for MIxS can be found [here](https://genomicsstandardsconsortium.github.io/mixs/InsdcMissingValueEnum/).
These specifications can be summarised as follows (examples are given below):

> 

Author: ```suggestion

These specifications can be summarised as follows (examples are given below):
```

Each of these cases have specific ways of encoding 'missingness' as per the INSDC guidelines. 

There are three levels at which you can report missing data, with an increasing amount of specificity for each:

- top level 
- lower level
- reporting level

Be as specific/granular as possible when reporting missing values, i.e., try and specify to the reporting level as far as possible. 
The _top level_ only indicates that the data are missing. The _lower-_ and _reporting_ levels then additional provide a reason for the missingness (from the [controlled vocabulary](https://www.insdc.org/technical-specifications/missing-value-reporting/)).

> Some additional recommendations:

Author: ```suggestion

Some additional recommendations:
```

_There is no specific taxonomy terms for positive and negative controls_

## How do I fill in negative controls?

_TODO_

## How to fill in missing data

> - Missing data is (meta)data that **can not** be reported. This can be due to various constraints, such as:  

Author: ```suggestion

- Missing data is (meta)data that **can not** be reported. This can be due to various constraints, such as:  
```

_There is no specific taxonomy terms for positive and negative controls_

## How do I fill in negative controls?

_TODO_

## How to fill in missing data

- Missing data is (meta)data that **can not** be reported. This can be due to various constraints, such as:  
  - the data is truly missing, meaning it is not known and can not be known;
  - it can not be shared for privacy reasons;
  - it can not be shared due to data agreement restrictions;
  - it is not applicable to that particular field (e.g. it is a negative control and the field does not apply)

> Fields in MIxS that are mandatory (or 'required') always require something filled into the given metadata entry. 

Author: ```suggestion

Fields in MIxS that are mandatory (or 'required') always require something filled into the given metadata entry. 
```

  - it can not be shared due to data agreement restrictions;
  - it is not applicable to that particular field (e.g. it is a negative control and the field does not apply)

Fields in MIxS that are mandatory (or 'required') always require something filled into the given metadata entry. 
If you do not have this information, you must encode this using the specific 'missing information' categories as below.

While optional fields in MIxS can be left blank, if you have a specific reason the information will never be able to be reported (see examples below), then it is also good to use these missing data categories there.

The way for encoding missing value terms in MIxS is derived from the [INSDC Missing Value Reporting](https://www.insdc.org/technical-specifications/missing-value-reporting/) specifications.
These specifications can be summarised as follows (examples are given below):

- Missing data is (meta)data that **can not** be reported. This can be due to various constraints, such as:
  - the data is truly missing, meaning it is not known and can not be known;
  - it can not be shared for privacy reasons;
  - it can not be shared due to data agreement restrictions;

>   - it is not applicable to that particular field (e.g. it is a negative control and the field does not apply)

Author: ```suggestion

```
